Adaptation (to climate change): Adjustments to current or expected climate variability and changing average climate conditions. This can serve to moderate harm and exploit beneficial opportunities. Various types of adaptation can be distinguished, including anticipatory and reactive adaptation, private and public adaptation, and autonomous and planned adaptation.
Adaptive assessment: The practice of identifying options to adapt to climate change and evaluating them in terms of criteria such as availability, benefits, costs, effectiveness, efficiency and feasibility.
Adaptation benefits: Avoided damage costs or accrued benefits following the adoption and implementation of adaptation measures.
Adaptive capacity: The ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate variability and ex- tremes) to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.
Afforestation: The conversion from other land uses into forest, or the increase of the canopy cover to above the 10 percent threshold.
Ageing of soils: Deposition of polysaccharides and other organic cementing agents by microbial activity in soil.
Agricultural Innovation System: A system of individuals, organizations, and enterprises focused on bringing new products, processes and forms of organization into social and economic use to achieve food and nutrition security, economic development, and sustainable natural resource management.
Agro-ecology: An ecological approach to agriculture that views agricultural areas as ecosystems and is con- cerned with the ecological impact of agricultural practices.
Agro-ecosystem: The organisms and environment of an agricultural area considered as an ecosystem.
Anaerobic digestion: Anaerobic Digestion is a natural process in which micro-organisms break down organic matter, in the absence of oxygen, into biogas (a mixture of carbon dioxide and methane) and digestate (a nitrogen-rich fertiliser).
Annex I countries: The group of countries included in Annex I (as amended in 1998) to the Framework Con- vention on Climate Change, including all the OECD countries and economies in transition. Under Articles 4.2 (a) and 4.2 (b) of the Convention, Annex I countries committed themselves specifically to the aim of returning individually or jointly to their 1990 levels of greenhouse gas emissions by the year 2000. By default, the other countries are referred to as Non-Annex I countries.
Agricultural biodiversity (agrobiodiversity): It is the result of natural selection processes and the careful se- lection and inventive developments of farmers, herders and fishers over millennia. Agrobiodiversity is a vital sub-set of biodiversity.
Aquifer: A water bearing stratum of permeable rock, sand or gravel.
Bagasse: Residues consisting of the fibrous portion of the sugar cane after the juice has been extracted. Used
as fuel in sugar mills, as animal feed and in paper production.
Biodiversity: The total diversity of all organisms and ecosystems at various spatial scales (from genes to entire biomass).
Capacity Development (CD): The process whereby individuals, organizations and society as a whole unleash, strengthen, create, adapt and maintain capacity to set and achieve their own development objectives over time.
Carbon dioxide (CO2): A naturally occurring gas, and also a by-product of burning fossil fuels and biomass, as well as land-use changes and other industrial processes.
Carbon finance (carbon market financing): Resources provided to projects generating (or expected to gener- ate) greenhouse gas (or carbon) emission reductions in the form of the purchase of such emission reductions.
Carbon sequestration: The process of increasing the carbon content of a reservoir or pool other than the at- mosphere.
Climate change: Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that can be identified (e.g. by using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability of its properties, and that persists for an extended period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or ex- ternal forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that the Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in its Article 1, defines climate change as: ‘a change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods’. The UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between climate change attributable to human activities alter- ing the atmospheric composition, and climate variability attributable to natural causes.
Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event): The occurrence of a value of a weather or climate vari- able above (or below) a threshold value near the upper (or lower) ends of the range of observed values of the variable. For simplicity, both extreme weather events and extreme climate events are referred to collectively as ‘climate extremes.’
Climate-proofing: Ensuring that climate risks are reduced to acceptable levels through long-lasting and en- vironmentally sound, economically viable and socially acceptable changes implemented at one or more of the stages in the project cycle.
Climate-smart agriculture (CSA): Agriculture that sustainably increases productivity, resilience (adaptation), reduces/removes greenhouse gases (mitigation), and enhances the achievement of national food security and development goals.
Climate variability: Variations in the mean state and other statistics (such as standard deviations, the occur- rence of extremes, etc.) of the climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond that of individual weather events. Variability may be due to natural internal processes within the climate system (internal variability), or to variations in natural or anthropogenic external forcing (external variability).
Co-benefits: Multiple benefits in different fields resulting from one policy, strategy, or action plan.
Communication for Development (ComDev): ComDev is a social process based on dialogue using a broad range of tools and methods. ComDev is about seeking change at different levels including listening, establish- ing trust, sharing knowledge and skills, building policies, debating and learning for sustained and meaningful change.
Conditional transfers: Feature the provision of transfers in exchange of certain actions by beneficiaries, such as sending children to school or attending health clinics. Transfers include food, cash (i.e. ‘conditional cash transfers’) or vouchers.
Conditional cash transfers: Conditional cash transfers seek to break the cycle of poverty by developing hu- man capital. Cash is provided upon the recipient’s fulfilment of specific criteria, including enrolling children in school, regularly visiting the doctor, or receiving vaccinations.
Conservation agriculture (CA): Conservation Agriculture is an approach to managing agro-ecosystems for improved and sustained productivity, increased profits and food security while preserving and enhancing the resource base and the environment. It is characterized by three linked principles, namely, continuous mini- mum mechanical soil disturbance; permanent organic soil cover; and diversification of crop species grown in sequences and/or associations.
Controlled traffic: Restriction of all heavy wheel traffic to permanent traffic lanes.
Coping capacity: The ability of people, organizations and systems, using available skills and resources, to face
and manage adverse conditions, emergencies or disasters.
Crop diversification: Species diversification through varied crop associations and/or rotations (involving an- nual and/or perennial crops including trees).
Cross breeding: Crossbreeding refers to the process of breeding an animal or plant with purebred parents of two different breeds, often with the intention to create offspring or seedlings that share the traits of both par- ent lineages, or producing an animal or plant with hybrid vigor.
Deficit irrigation: An irrigation practice whereby water supply is reduced below maximum levels and mild stress is allowed with minimal effects on yield.
Deforestation: The conversion of forest to another land use or the long-term reduction of tree canopy cover below the 10 percent threshold.
Disaster: A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society involving widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses and impacts, which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources.
Disaster risk reduction (DRR): The concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic ef- forts to analyse and manage the causal factors of disasters, including through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and property, wise management of land and the environment and improved preparedness for adverse events.
Disaster risk management (DRM): The systematic process of using administrative directives, organizations, and operational skills and capacities to implement strategies, policies and improved coping capacities in order to lessen the adverse impacts of hazards and the possibility of disaster.
Drought: The phenomenon that exists when precipitation is significantly below normal recorded levels, caus- ing serious hydrological imbalances that often adversely affect land resources and production systems.
Drylands: Areas characterized by lack of water, which constrains their two major interlinked services of pri- mary production and nutrient cycling.
Dry spell: Short period of water stress during critical crop growth stages and which can occur with high fre- quency but with minor impacts compared with droughts.
Ecosystem: The interactive system formed from all living organisms and their abiotic (physical and chemical) environment within a given area. Ecosystems cover a hierarchy of spatial scales and can comprise the entire globe, biomes at the continental scale or small, well-circumscribed systems such as a small pond.
Ecosystem functioning: Builds on the processes shaped by interactions among biological communities of both wild and domesticated species, biophysical processes such as water regulation, and nutrient recycling.
Ecosystem services: Ecological processes or functions that have monetary or non-monetary value to indi- viduals or society at large. There are: supporting services such as productivity or biodiversity maintenance; provisioning services such as food, fibre, or fish; regulating services such as climate regulation or carbon se- questration; and cultural services such as tourism or spiritual and aesthetic appreciation.
Ecosystem resilience: The capacity of an ecosystem to absorb external pressure or perturbations through change and re-organisation, but still retain the same basic structure and ways of functioning.
E-learning (electronic learning): Term covering a wide set of applications and processes, such as Web-based learning, computer-based learning, virtual classrooms, and digital collaboration. It includes the delivery of content via Internet, intranet/extranet (LAN/WAN), audio- and videotape, satellite broadcast, interactive TV, CD-ROM, and more.
Energy efficiency: Ratio of energy output of a conversion process or of a system to its energy input.
Enteric fermentation: Enteric fermentation is a natural part of the digestive process for many ruminant ani- mals where anaerobic microbes, called methanogens, decompose and ferment food present in the digestive tract producing compounds that are then absorbed by the host animal. A resulting byproduct of this process is methane.
Enteric methane: Methane emitted as a natural by-products of microbial fermentation of carbohydrates and, to a lesser extent, amino acids in the rumen and the hindgut of farm animals.
Erosion: The process of removal and transport of soil and rock by weathering, mass wasting, and the action of streams, glaciers, waves, winds and underground water.
Evaporation: The amount of water that leaves the basin or country as vapor. Evaporation can be beneficial or non-beneficial. Non-beneficial (Enb) includes evaporation from open water bodies (reservoirs, canals) and from bare soil.
Evapotranspiration: It is the sum of evaporation and plant transpiration. It is the water lost from an area through the combined effects of evaporation from the ground surface and transpiration from the vegetation.
Ex-situ conservation: The maintenance of genetic material outside of the ‘normal’ environment where the spe- cies has evolved and aims to maintain the genetic integrity of the material at the time of collecting. Gene banks, botanical gardens and zoos are typical examples of ex-situ conservation activities.
Exposure: The nature and degree to which a system is exposed to significant climatic variations.
Extension: Rural or agricultural extension services refer to the transfer of research and new practices through farmer training. Successful extension does not merely facilitate the use of new technology or crop alternatives, but empowers farmers to make farm management decisions based on knowledge of options available to them.
Externalities: Situations when the effect of production or consumption of goods and services imposes costs or benefits on others which are not reflected in the prices charged for the goods and services being provided.
Farmer Field School (FFS): The FFS approach is an innovative, participatory and interactive learning approach that emphasizes problem solving and discovery based learning. FFS aims to build farmers’ capacity to analyze their production systems, identify problems, test possible solutions, and eventually encourage the participants to adopt the practices most suitable to their farming systems.
Food losses: decrease in edible food mass available for human consumption throughout the different seg- ments of the supply chain. In addition to quantitative losses, food products can also face a deterioration of quality, leading to a loss of economic and nutritional value.
Food and nutrition security: This exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic ac- cess to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.
Food system: Involves all processes and activities related to the production, distribution and consumption of food that can feed a population and affects human nutrition and health. It operates within an infrastructure (roads, rivers, ports, energy and communication networks, etc.) and is influenced by political, social, economic and environmental aspects.
Food value chain: The full range of farms and firms and their successive coordinated value-adding activities that transform raw agricultural materials into food products that are sold to final consumers and disposed after use.
Food waste: Food losses resulting from decisions to discard food that still has value. Food waste is most often associated with the behavior of retailers, the food service sector and consumers, but food waste and losses take place all along food supply chains.
Genetic resources (for food and agriculture): This includes any material of plant, animal, microbial or other origin containing functional units of heredity that is of actual or potential value for food and agriculture. Ge- netic resources for food and agriculture includes the diversity present in agricultural, pastoral, forest and aquatic production systems or of importance to them: the variety and variability of animals, plants and micro- organisms at the genetic, species and ecosystem levels that sustain the structure, functions and processes of production systems. This diversity is often the result of the work of farmers, pastoralists, forest dwellers and fisherfolk over many hundreds of generations and reflects the diversity of both human activities and natural processes.
Global circulation model: Numerical models that represent physical processes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and land surface, and are the most advanced tools currently available for simulating the response of the global climate system to increasing greenhouse gas concentrations.
Green economy: An economy that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities.
Green growth: Economic growth that is environmentally sustainable: green in that it is efficient in use of natu- ral resources; clean, in that it minimizes pollution and environmental impacts; and resilient in accounting for natural hazards and the role of environmental management and natural capital in preventing physical disas- ters.
Greenhouse gases: Those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of infrared radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere, and clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapor (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O) methane (CH4), and ozone (O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere. Moreover, there are a number of entirely human-made greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, such as the halocarbons and other chlorine and bromine-containing substances, dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Besides CO2, N2O, and CH4, the Kyoto Protocol deals with the greenhouse gases sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
Hazard: A dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity or condition that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental damage.
High regret options: They are options valid for future climate but not necessarily for the current climate situ- ation, and would therefore represent costs and have possible negative consequences under current climate, and therefore require careful consideration in terms of risk analysis.
Hydrological cycle: The process of evaporation, transpiration, vertical and horizontal transport of vapor, con- densation, precipitation, interception, runoff, infiltration, percolation, storage, the flow of water from conti- nents to oceans, and return.
Impact assessment (of climate change): The practice of identifying and evaluating, in monetary and/or non- monetary terms, the effects of climate change on natural and human systems. Potential impacts: all impacts that may occur given a projected change in climate, without considering adaptation. Residual impacts: the impacts of climate change that would occur after adaptation.
In-situ conservation: implies the maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural surroundings and – in the case of domesticated or cultivated species on farm – in the surrounding where they have developed their distinctive properties. This method preserves both the population and the evolutionary processes that enable the population to adapt by managing organisms in their natural state or within their normal range.
In-vitro conservation (of animal genetic resources): Conservation by cryopreservation of a breed’s genetic material (usually semen, embryos or somatic cells), so that live animals can, if necessary, be regenerated in the future.
In-vivo conservation (of animal genetic resources): Conservation of a breed through maintenance of live ani- mal populations, which encompasses both in-situ conservation of animals in their typical production environ- ment and ex-situ in-vivo conservation, in non-typical surroundings, such as a research farm.
Inclusiveness: Agri-food systems and related agri-food value chains that enable ample participation by com- mercial input suppliers, farmers, traders, wholesalers, retailers and consumers as well as commonly mar- ginalized groups (the poor, disabled, youth and women) in economic activities. Its focus is on wider social participation in agri-food systems and creating positive benefits to communities; it enables and involves even the smallest of participants in the overall agri-food system and others in a community that may not be involved in commercial activities; fair returns to all participants involved in activities; and fair, equal and safe employ- ment conditions.
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs): Technologies designed to access, process and transmit information. ICTs encompass a full range of technologies – from traditional, widely used devices such as ra- dios, telephones or TV, to more sophisticated tools like computers, mobile phones or the Internet.
Institutions: Encompasses formal organizations and contracts as well as informal social and cultural norms and conventions that operate within and between organizations and individuals.
Integrated landscape management: An umbrella term for natural resource management systems that rec- ognize the value of various ecosystem services to multiple stakeholders, and how this leads them to pursue different land use objectives or livelihood strategies.
Integrated pest management: An ecosystem approach to crop production and protection that combines differ- ent management strategies and practices to grow healthy crops and minimize the use of pesticides.
Joint Implementation (JI): Market-based implementation mechanism defined in Article 6 of the Kyoto Proto- col, allowing Annex I countries or companies from these countries to implement projects jointly that limit or reduce emissions or enhance sinks, and to share the Emissions Reduction Units. JI activity is also permitted in Article 4.2(a) of the Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Kyoto protocol: The Kyoto Protocol to the Framework Convention on Climate Change () was adopted at the Third Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP) in 1997 in Kyoto. It contains legally binding commit- ments, in addition to those included in the UNFCCC. Annex B countries agreed to reduce their anthropogenic GHG emissions (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride) by at least 5 percent below 1990 levels in the commitment period 2008-2012. The Kyoto Protocol came into force on 16 February 2005.
Land grabbing: Controversial large-scale land acquisitions by domestic and transnational companies, govern- ments, or individuals, which result in the disenfranchisement of the poor. The term has gained currency since the large-scale land acquisitions following the 2007-2008 world food price crisis.
Landscape: Agricultural landscapes can be described in terms of the three elements: (i) structure – the inter- action between environmental features, land use patterns and man-made objects; (ii) functions – the provi- sion of landscape functions for farmers and for society (environmental services); and (iii) value – concerning the value the society places on agricultural landscape and the costs of maintaining and enhancing landscape provisions by agriculture. Because the underlying human and natural processes are subject to change and evolution, landscapes are dynamic systems.
Landscape approach: Landscape approach means the management of production systems and natural re- sources in an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services and small enough to be managed by the people using the land and producing those services.
Low regret options: see no regret options
Maladaptation: Any changes in natural or human systems that inadvertently increase vulnerability to climatic
stimuli; an adaptation that does not succeed in reducing vulnerability but increases it instead.
Microfinance: The provision of credit and other financial services to small businesses which typically do not have access to such services, aiming to foster economic development.
Mitigation (in relation to climate change): Technological change and substitution that reduces resource inputs and emissions per unit of output. Although several social, economic and technological policies would produce an emission reduction, with respect to climate change, mitigation means implementing policies to reduce GHG emissions and enhance sinks.
Mitigation (in relation to hazard): The limiting or lessening of the adverse impacts of hazards and related dis- asters.
National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs): Documents prepared by least developed countries (LDCs) that identify the activities to address urgent and immediate needs for adapting to climate change.
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs): A set of government prioritized actions aimed at reducing or limiting greenhouse gas emissions.
National platform for disaster risk reduction: A generic term for national mechanisms for coordination and policy guidance on disaster risk reduction that are multi-sectoral and inter-disciplinary in nature, with public, private and civil society participation involving all concerned entities within a country.
Natural hazard: Natural process or phenomenon that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental damage.
Networks: Networks can be vast repositories of data and/or affiliations of expert contacts on particular issues. Networks allow for knowledge to be shared and managed within and across institutions, thereby facilitating collaboration and research. Networks can also take up an advocacy role.
No regret options: options that are valid whether climate change will occur as expected or not. In general, they are aimed at increasing the resilience of rural population and reducing their vulnerability to water-related shocks.
Ocean acidification: Increased concentrations of CO2 in sea water causing a measurable increase in acidity (i.e. a reduction in ocean pH). This may lead to reduced calcification rates of calcifying organisms such as corals, molluscs, algae and crustaceans.
Paludiculture: The process of transforming land into a wetland such as a marsh, a swamp or a bog.
Partnership brokers: Skilled communicators who support interactive collaboration between different types of stakeholders (e.g. public-private partnerships). Partnership brokering should minimize asymmetries of power between actors, ensuring that all stakeholders are heard and their expertise shared appropriately. Depending on the local context, the capacities and legitimacy available, a brokering role can be played by local govern- ment, extension services, civil society organizations or national agricultural research systems.
Payment for Environmental services (PES): An economic instrument designed to provide positive incentives to users of agricultural land and those involved in coastal or marine management. These incentives are ex- pected to result in continued or improved provision of ecosystem services, which, in turn, will benefit society as a whole.
Peatlands: Peatlands or organic soils are soils with a substantial layer of organic matter near or at the surface. Peri-urban agriculture: An agricultural system developed around cities to take advantage of local markets for
high value crops (fruits, vegetables, dairy products, etc.).
Permaculture: Permaculture (permanent+agriculture) is the conscious design and maintenance of agricul- turally productive ecosystems which have the diversity, stability, and resilience of natural ecosystems. It is a land use and community building movement which strives for the harmonious integration of human dwellings, microclimate, annual and perennial plants, animals, soils, and water into stable, productive communities.
Private sector: The part of an economy, industry, etc., which is privately owned and free from direct state con- trol.
Public good: A good with benefits for the broader economy and society, or which generates benefits in a differ- ent location from where the activity takes place.
Public sector: The part of a country’s economy which is controlled by the state.
Rainfed agriculture: Agricultural practice relying exclusively on rainfall as its source of water.
Reduce, Reuse, Recycle: The ‘3 R’s’’ of waste management. Reduction refers to minimizing the amount of waste generated from a given operation or process. Reuse refers to using the waste material “as is”— such as using waste oil for fuel. Recycling refers to reclaiming materials from the waste product or transforming the waste product into new products.
Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD): REDD is a mechanism to create an incentive for developing countries to protect, better manage and wisely use their forest resources, contribut- ing to the global fight against climate change. REDD strategies aim to make forests more valuable standing than they would be cut down by creating a financial value for the carbon stored in trees. Once this carbon is assessed and quantified, the final phase of REDD involves developed countries paying developing countries carbon offsets for their standing forests. REDD is a cutting-edge forestry initiative that aims at tipping the economic balance in favour of sustainable management of forests so that their formidable economic, environ- mental and social goods and services benefit countries, communities, biodiversity and forest users while also contributing to important reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Plus (REDD+): REDD+ strategies go beyond deforestation and forest degradation, and include the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in reducing emissions.
Reforestation: The re-establishment of forest formations after a temporary condition with less than 10 percent of canopy cover due to human-induced or natural perturbations. (FAO, 2000a)
Residual feed intake: The difference between an animal’s actual feed intake and its expected feed require- ments for maintenance and growth.
Resilience: The ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner.
Riparian: Relating to land adjoining a stream or river.
Risk: The combination of the probability of an event and its negative consequences.
Risk assessment: A methodology to determine the nature and extent of risk by analysing potential hazards and evaluating existing conditions of vulnerability that together could potentially harm exposed people, property, services, livelihoods and the environment on which they depend.
Safety nets: A sub-set of broader social protection systems. Safety nets mostly include non-contributory trans- fers, such as in-kind food, cash or vouchers; they can be provided conditionally or unconditionally, and can be targeted or universal in coverage. Safety nets may also include other interventions to improve access to food and basic essentials, such as price subsidies. The terms safety nets, social safety nets, social transfers and social assistance are often used interchangeably.
Salinisation: The accumulation of salts in soils.
Sensitivity (to climate variability or change): Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either ad- versely or beneficially, by climate variability or change. The effect may be direct (e.g. a change in crop yield in response to a change in the mean, range or variability of temperature) or indirect (e.g. damages caused by an increase in the frequency of coastal flooding due to sea-level rise).
Smallholder: The definition of smallholders differs between countries and between agro-ecological zones. In favourable areas of smallholder subsistence agriculture with high population densities, smallholders often cultivate less than one hectare of land, whereas they may cultivate ten hectares or more in semi-arid areas, or manage up to ten head of livestock.
Social protection: initiatives that: (1) provide income (cash) or consumption (food) transfers to the poor; (2) protect the vulnerable against livelihood risks; and (3) enhance the social status and rights of the excluded and marginalised”.
Soil health: The capacity of soil to function as a living system.
Soil organic matter (SOM): Soil organic matter is any material produced originally by living organisms (plant or animal) that is returned to the soil and goes through the decomposition process. At any given time, it consists of a range of materials from the intact original tissues of plants and animals to the substantially decomposed mixture of materials known as humus.
Soil structure: Soil structure is defined by the way individual particles of sand, silt, and clay are assembled. Single particles when assembled are called aggregates. Aggregation of soil particles can occur in different patterns, resulting in different soil structures.
Soil texture: Texture indicates the relative content of particles of various sizes, such as sand, silt and clay in the soil.
Subsoiling or Ripping: Soil preparation treatment done with tined implements to break up hardpans without turning the soil upside down.
Supplementary irrigation: The process of providing additional water to stabilise or increase yields under site conditions where a crop can normally be grown under direct rainfall, the additional water being insufficient to produce a crop. The concept consists in making up rainfall deficits during critical stages of the crops in order to increase yields.
Supply chain: The full range of activities, which are required to bring a product or service from conception, through the different phases of production (involving a combination of physical transformation and the input of various producer services), delivery to final customers, and final disposal after use.
Sustainability (Economic): A situation whereby: (1) the value added resulting from upgrading in the value chain (additional profits, wages, taxes, consumer value) is positive for each stakeholder in the extended value chain whose behavior (in terms of upgrading) is expected to change in order to create the additional value; and (2) the generation of added value sets in motion, or speeds up, a process of growth and structural transformation.
Sustainability (Environmental): Meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs.
Sustainable and inclusive value chain development: The full range of farms and firms and their successive co- ordinated value-adding activities that transform raw agricultural materials into food products that are sold to final consumers and disposed after use, in a manner that is profitable throughout the chain, has broad-based benefits for society and does not permanently deplete natural resources.
Sustainable use of genetic resources: The use of components of biological diversity in a way and at a rate that does not lead to the long-term decline of biological diversity, thereby maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of present and future generations.
Triple bottom line: The intersection of social, environmental and financial performance.
Unconditional transfers: Transfers that do not require reciprocal actions by beneficiaries (such as sending
children to school) in order to access program transfers.
Vulnerability: The propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected; a function of potential impacts (expo- sure and sensitivity to exposure) and adaptive capacity.
Watershed: A topographically delineated area that is drained by a stream system, i.e. the total land area that drains to some point on a stream or river. The watershed is a hydrologic unit that has been described and used as a physical-biological unit and a socio-economic-political unit for planning and managing of natural resources.
Water scarcity: The point at which the aggregate impact of all users impinges on the supply or quality of water under prevailing institutional arrangements to the extent that the demand by all sectors, including the environ- ment, cannot be fully satisfied.
Weather-index insurance: A class of insurance products that can allow weather-related risk to be insured in developing countries where traditional agricultural insurance may not always be feasible, thereby helping to increase farmers’ ability (and willingness) to invest in measures that might increase their productivity.
Agriculture has to address simultaneously three intertwined challenges: ensuring food security through increased productivity and income, adapting to climate change and contributing to climate change mitigation. Addressing these challenges, exacerbating global pressure on natural resources, especially water, will require radical changes in our food systems.
It is precisely to articulate these changes that FAO has forged the concept of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) as a way forward for food security in a changing climate. CSA aims to improve food security, help communities adapt to climate change and contribute to climate change mitigation by adopting appropriate practices, developing enabling policies and institutions and mobilizing needed finances.
This module gives an overview of climate smart agriculture, as an approach to address in an integrated way the interlinked challenges of food security and climate change. The first section describes the challenges to be addressed. It briefly recalls the current state of food insecurity and prospective of population and food demand growth. The main impacts of climate change on agriculture are summarized as well as the contribution of agriculture to global greenhouse gas emissions.
The second section shows how two joint principles guide the necessary changes of systems: more efficiency in the use of resources, to increase production while reducing emissions intensity of the food produced and consumed and more resilience, to get prepared to variability and change.
The third section briefly touches upon some of the issues to be addressed to implement climate-smart agriculture and progress towards efficient and resilient food systems. It requires comprehensive policies at every level, adequate institutions and proper governance to make the necessary choices. It also requires new financing to address the needs in terms of investments and research and to enable the farmers to overcome barriers to adoption of new practices including up-front costs and income foregone during the transition period.
The last section articulates the concept of CSA closely linked issues of sustainable intensification, green growth and sustainable development.
Agriculture and food systems must undergo significant transformations in order to meet the related challenges of food security and climate change.
Increasing resource efficiency is essential both to increase and ensure food security on the long term and to contribute to mitigate climate change.
Building resilience to every type of risk is essential to be prepared for uncertainty and change.
Efficiency and resilience have to be considered together, at every scale and from both environmental, economic and social perspectives.
Implementing climate-smart agriculture can be a major driver of a Green Economy and a concrete way to operationalize sustainable development.
Addressing food security and climate change requires concerted and coordinated involvement and action of all stakeholders on a long-term perspective.
Climate smart agriculture is not a new agricultural system, nor a set of practices. It is a new approach, a way to guide the needed changes of agricultural systems, given the necessity to jointly address food security and climate change.
Agriculture and food systems must improve and ensure food security, and to do so they need to adapt to climate change and natural resource pressures, and contribute to mitigating climate change. These challenges, being interconnected, have to be addressed simultaneously.
To address these three intertwined challenges, food systems have to become at the same time more efficient and resilient, at every scale from the farm to the global food system. They have to become more efficient in resource use: use less land, water and inputs to produce more food sustainably, and be more resilient to changes and shocks.
Agriculture and food systems not only utilize a very diverse range of resources but also produce a very diverse range of outputs. They provide physical products but also income and employment, for farmers, in agro-industry and as a driver of the non-farm rural economy. From a food security perspective, these three outputs are equally important. It implies a more complex conception of resource efficiency, by which employment, which is formally an input in pure economic terms, can be seen as a key output.
The green economy is driven by the idea that, in the long run, given the increasing scarcity of resources, physical resource efficiency and economic efficiency will become closer, due to market fundamentals and through policies, which would factor in environmental and social externalities (positive and negative) of input use and production. Agriculture needs to produce more with resources (land, water, energy and nutrients) that are becoming scarcer and thus more expensive.
Evidence shows that farmers economize in their use of inputs in reaction to increased prices. A study of how US farmers reacted to higher energy and fertilizer prices in 2006 showed that 23 percent of commercial farms reduced their usage of both energy and fertilizers. To reduce energy consumption, they used machines less intensively and serviced engines more frequently. Lower usage of fertilizers was also achieved through greater use of soil testing, precision application and changes of crops.
Increasing efficiency in the use of resources is also one of the driving principles of CSA. GHG emissions from agriculture are linked to its use of resources. Three production factors have an important influence on total agricultural GHG emissions: (i) area, since converting land into cultivations would require either deforestation or grasslands being converted to croplands, which would induce higher CO2 emissions; (ii) fertilizers, whose production is an important source of CO2 and which at the field level translate into nitrous oxide emissions; and (iii) livestock, which is an important source of methane and nitrous oxide emissions.
As agriculture is an important driver of deforestation, reducing agricultural expansion through sustainable intensification on already cultivated land could have a major mitigation effect. The HLPE considers that ending most conversion of forest to cultivation should be a mitigation priority.
Studies show that, at the global level, from 1961 to 2005, crop production increased by over 160 percent, mostly as a result of 135 percent yield increases, with only 27 percent increases in crop area. This intensification allowed farmers to increase food production while emitting the equivalent of 590 gigatons of CO2 less than what would have been emitted by expanding the area under cultivation on the basis of assuming 1961 yields. They conclude that land use change emissions (even avoided ones) are much more important than direct emissions from agricultural systems. Therefore, improvement of crop yields should be prominent in any mitigation strategy.
Other studies show that across the tropics, between 1980 and 2000, more than 55 percent of new agricultural land came at the expense of intact forests and another 28 percent came from disturbed forests. Considering the role of agriculture as a driver of deforestation, sustainable intensification should also play a part in Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) programmes.
Studies have shown the importance in many developing countries of the yield gap. The yield gap is the difference between actual farm yields, as represented by the average yield achieved by farmers in a defined region over several seasons, and the potential yields which are the maximum achievable yield with latest varieties and by removing as much as possible all the constraints as achieved in highly controlled experimental stations. Reducing this gap is essential to improve food security and reduce deforestation.
Nutrients are essential to increase yields. But production of synthetic fertilizers is energy intensive, with high CO2 emissions and economic costs. In addition, when applied in the field, these fertilizers contribute to N2O emissions. Therefore, there is a need to improve fertilization and to limit the economic costs and the emissions at the same time. Improving fertilizer efficiency is thus essential. This can be done through a variety of techniques. One way is to match more precisely the nutrients with plant needs during the growing season, such as by fractioning the total amount in multiple doses. Other techniques include precision farming and placing nutrients closer to plant roots, such as deep placement of urea for rice.
Urea Deep Placement (UDP) technique, developed by the International Fertilizer Development Center (IFDC), is a good example of a climate-smart solution for rice systems. The usual technique for applying urea, the main nitrogen fertilizer for rice, is through a broadcast application. This is a very inefficient practice, with 60 to 70 percent nitrogen losses contributing to GHG emissions and water pollution. In the UDP technique, urea is made into 'briquettes' of 1 to 3 grams that are placed at 7 to 10 cm soil depth after the paddy is transplanted. This technique decreases nitrogen losses by 40 percent and increases urea efficiency to 50 percent. It increases yields by 25 percent with an average 25 percent decrease in urea use.
Sustainable crop production intensification (SCPI) can be summed up in the words 'Save and Grow'. Sustainable intensification means a productive agriculture that conserves and enhances natural resources. It uses an ecosystem approach that draws on nature’s contribution to crop growth – soil organic matter, water flow regulation, pollination and natural predation of pests. It applies appropriate external inputs at the right time, in the right amount to improved crop varieties that are resilient to climate change. It also uses nutrients, water and external inputs more efficiently.
Increasing the sustainable intensification of crop production is achievable. This can be done through increasing resource use efficiency and cutting the use of fossil fuels. This saves money for farmers and prevents the negative effect of over-use of particular inputs. Inefficient fertilizer use is common in many regions. In some cases, this is a consequence of government subsidies. Yet over-use does not have the intended impact on plant growth and can result in the contamination of ground and surface water. Inappropriate insecticide use may actually induce pest outbreaks by disrupting the natural population of predators. Overuse of herbicides can lead to the emergence of herbicide-tolerant varieties of weeds. Problems of salinization or reduced soil health may also come from inappropriate management practices, such as irrigating without proper drainage.
Better maintenance of ecosystem services can be accomplished through: adopting agricultural practices that are based on crop rotations, applying minimum tillage and maintaining soil cover; relying on natural processes of predation or biocontrol of pest or weed problems; managing pollination services; selecting diverse and appropriate varieties; and carefully targeting the use of external inputs. These practices are knowledge-intensive and they are often also interdependent. In the initial stages, encouraging these practices may require public support through targeted incentives and investment. Ideally, the price of agricultural commodities would increasingly reflect the full cost of production, including the potential damage done to natural ecosystems, thereby encouraging more sustainable consumption.
The livestock sector has expanded rapidly in recent decades and will continue to do so as demand for meat, eggs and dairy products is expected to continue to grow, especially in developing countries. Livestock grazing already occupies 26 percent of the earth’s ice-free land surface, and the production of livestock feed uses 33 percent of agricultural cropland. There is an urgent need to improve the resource use and production efficiency of livestock production systems, both to improve food security and reduce the intensity of GHG emissions.
A study on cow milk shows that the emissions per litre of milk are dependent on the efficiency of the cows: the more efficient the cows, the fewer emissions per litre of milk. This increased efficiency should be pursued in all possible ways, from livestock selection and nutrition to manure management.
The selection to improve efficiency and thus reduce GHG emission of livestock systems involves numerous parameters, including productivity per animal, early maturity, fertility, feed conversion ratio, and longevity. In controlled environments, breeding for high performance has already resulted in significant reductions in the amount of feed per unit of product, especially for monogastrics and dairy cattle.
Improving animal health, including disease prevention and management, has a strong impact on the efficiency of livestock systems, food security, and climate change. Establishing strong veterinary institutions and policies are essential both to improve livestock efficiency and increase the preparedness against new risks, including those that result from climate change.
Nutrition plays a critical role in making livestock production systems more efficient. Proper nutrition is imperative for achieving high reproductive efficiency in animals, protecting them from diseases and making animal health interventions more effective. Imbalanced feeding leads to productivity losses and an increase in emission of greenhouse gases.
Improving pasture productivity and quality, either by improving the composition of forage, especially in artificial pastures, and by better pasture management is an important means to improve food security, adapt to climate change and reduce both direct and indirect GHG emissions. Supplementing poor quality forages with fodder trees, as in silvo-pastoral systems, or with legumes, increases their digestibility, thereby improving the production efficiency of livestock and decreasing methane emissions.
Quantitative information on key environmental impacts along livestock supply chains is required to (a) analyse food systems and inform decisions at the production and processing levels to improve environmental performance; (b) develop and evaluate corresponding policy decisions (governmental and non-governmental); and (c) inform relevant stakeholders.
Valuable work aimed at improving the measurement of environmental performance is being carried out by the livestock industry, governments, academia, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). However, inconsistencies in the methods used and the one-off nature of many of the studies do not provide consistent guidance on the required changes in practices and the potential efficiency gains that can be achieved.
Consultations with stakeholders during 2010 and 2011 confirmed that there was demand for a partnership on benchmarking and monitoring the environmental performance of the livestock sector. A participative formulation process led to the identification of key functions and deliverables of the Partnership. It was agreed that representatives of the private sector, NGOs, governments, science, and international standard organizations should be involved.
Crop systems and livestock systems can also be improved by their better integration. Integrated crop and livestock systems, at various scales (on-farm and area-wide) increase the efficiency and environmental sustainability of both production methods. When livestock and crops are produced together, the waste of one is a resource for the other.
Manure increases crop production and crop residues and by-products feed animals, improving their productivity. In these systems, livestock is a strategic element for adaptation. The animals provide an alternative to cropping in areas becoming marginal for cropping, offer a way to escape poverty and represent a coping mechanism in vulnerable and variable (in particular weather-related) natural environments. They also constitute a capital that can be converted to cash when needed.
Rice-Fish integrated systems have been traditionally practiced in many Asian countries, either as concurrent or alternate cultivation (FAO et al., 2001) and constitute another example of very productive systems that also provide more balanced diets. They hold great potential to improve food security and nutrition and can be both improved and up-scaled as shown by recent research in Bangladesh.
Agroforestry is the use of trees and shrubs as part of agricultural systems. It contributes to prevent soil erosion, facilitates water infiltration and diminishes the impacts of extreme weather.
Nitrogen-fixing leguminous trees, such as Faidherbia albida, increase soil fertility and yields. 
Agroforestry systems use less fertilizer, reducing the direct emissions of N2O and indirect GHG emissions created through fertilizer production. By increasing biomass above ground and in soils, they help create carbon sinks.
Global food losses and waste amount to a third of all food produced.
Global differences among regions in food loss and waste for the same type of products indicate potential areas for improvement.
Climate change will profoundly affect, in any given place, the conditions under which agricultural activities are undertaken. It will affect existing risks and add new risks and uncertainties. As pointed out by the High-Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition (HLPE, 2012a), models cannot project climate change effects precisely, neither in time nor at the local scale needed for decision makers. Moreover, climate models do not deal with the consequences of increased variability, the impacts of stress combinations, the effects of climate change on whole agro-ecosystems, including crops, their pests and predators of these pests. As it is impossible to predict exactly these changes, it is often difficult to devise and promote precise adaptation measures. One of the most effective approaches to be prepared for uncertainty and new risks – a ‘no regret’ approach that is valid whatever changes happen – is to reduce vulnerability and increase resilience of a given system (FAO and OECD, 2012; HLPE, 2012a). 
Agricultural production is subject to risks of various types: economic and price-related risks, climatic, environmental, pests and diseases, at different scales and, often, political instability. Yield risk in main staple crops is particularly important for smallholders who tend to consume a large part of their own production. Farmers are also exposed to economic risks, including land tenure insecurity, variations in access to inputs (fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, feed) in quantity and quality and variations in access to markets. 
‘Risk’ is used here to designate the potential of shocks and stresses that affect, in different ways, the state of systems, communities, households or individuals. Probability, uncertainty (when probabilities of occurrence or even nature of impacts are unknown), severity, economic scale, time scales and direct and indirect costs are all factors that should be taken into account.
The impact of a risk depends on the shock itself and on the resilience of the system that receives the shock. Depending on their vulnerability, different systems will be more or less affected by the same shock. Depending on their resilience, different systems will recover more or less easily.
Food systems are by nature ecological, economic and social (Ericksen, 2008; Fussel and Klein, 2006). Each dimension has its own organization and interacts with the others. Food systems can be described and analyzed in each of their dimensions. There are also theories attempting to understand and describe ‘complex systems’ (Holling, 2001; Gunderson and Holling, 2001) to obtain a better grasp of the concept of sustainability. 
Even when considering a single simple farming system, a single stress or shock can have various impacts of diverse nature and time scale. The global impact of a shock often also depends on the transmission of its effects from one dimension (biophysical) to the others (economic and social) and from one level (household) to another (community).
Even when considering a single simple farming system, a single stress or shock can have various impacts of diverse nature and time scale. The global impact of a shock often also depends on the transmission of its effects from one dimension (biophysical) to the others (economic and social) and from one level (household) to another (community).
Vulnerability can be defined as the propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected. It is a complex concept that needs to be considered across scales and across various dimensions. It can be defined as vulnerability of ‘what’ to ‘what’.
The degree of ‘specific’ vulnerability of a system to a particular type of risk can be analysed as exposure and sensitivity to the potential shock that relates to this risk, and also depends on the ‘adaptive capacity’ of the system to cope with the impact of the shock. The adaptive capacity itself can also be affected by an external shock. In a given system, shocks in one dimension can spread to another dimension. For example, production shocks can be transmitted to the economic and social domains. This transmission can be linear, amplified or reduced, depending on the policies and institutions that are in place. 
Systems can be defined at various scales. An upper-scale system is generally composed of different systems defined at lower scales. For instance, from a biophysical perspective, landscape systems are composed of farm systems. The vulnerability of an upper-scale system depends on the vulnerability of the subsystems that it includes. It also depends on how other systems to which it is linked, including higher-scale systems, are vulnerable or insensitive to shocks. For example, the vulnerability of a farm to a certain risk is compounded by its own vulnerability and the vulnerability of the landscape in which it is situated, and whose vulnerability is in turn compounded by the vulnerabilities of the various farms situated in it and by the vulnerability of the higher-level system (e.g. the territory) in which it is situated.
Resilience can be described as the capacity of systems, communities, households or individuals to prevent, mitigate or cope with risk and recover from shocks. At first approximation, resilience is the opposite of vulnerability. However, resilience adds a time dimension. A system is resilient when it is less vulnerable to shocks across time and can recover from them. Essential to resilience is adaptive capacity. Adaptive capacity encompasses two dimensions: recovery from shocks and response to changes in order to ensure the ‘plasticity’ of the system.
As for vulnerability, resilience can be specified as “resilience of what to what”. However, focusing on specified resilience may cause the system to lose resilience in other ways. This is why general resilience can be described as being “about coping with uncertainty in all ways”.
And as for vulnerability, resilience can be considered in various dimensions (biophysical, economic and social) and at various scales. The way the various dimensions and scales interact is crucial, precisely because of the importance of general resilience for coping with uncertainty. For instance, studies show that increasing the level of education of farmers can be an efficient mean for reducing farmers’ household vulnerability to climate change.
Resilience puts a greater emphasis on the capacity of a system to recover and transform itself over the long term, and adapt to its changing environment in a dynamic perspective. It implies that it is not only shocks, as a change relative to an average, that have to be considered, but also the change of the average itself. Ultimately, the question is until what point can a system adapt before changing to another type of system?
To a great extent increasing resilience can be achieved by reducing vulnerabilities and increasing adaptive capacity. This can be done by reducing exposure to risk, reducing sensitivity and increasing adaptive capacity for every type of risk. It can act in each domain, either biophysical or economic and social. One way to achieve better resilience is to reduce transmission of shocks between types of risks, between scales and between domains and to organize compensation between scales (for instance transport of feed) or between domains (for instance safety nets) to avoid cumulative and long-term effects.
In a first approximation we can identify the following three ways to build resilience: 1. Reduce exposure. There is a fundamental difference between climatic and non-climatic shocks in this regard because most of the shocks on farm can be reduced at the source, or limited in their extension, contrary to climatic shocks. The best example of a non-climatic shock is probably the eradication of Rinderpest, which has totally suppressed a major risk for livestock and those depending on it. 2. Reduce the sensitivity of systems to shocks. Using drought-resistant varieties or keeping adequate stocks of hay can for instance, reduce sensitivity to drought. 3.Increase adaptive capacity. This includes considering the modifications of a system and taking into account all the potential shocks and changes together (to take into account compensating, cumulative or exacerbating effects). 
In traditional slash-and-burn systems, a family needs close to 6 hectares to maintain itself on a diet of corn and beans. The family exploits a plot for two years and then sets it aside for 14 years. In agroforestry systems a plot is exploited for 10 years, producing, along with corn and beans a variety of other products, often including livestock. The plot is then set aside for only 5 years. A family thus needs 1.4 hectares to sustain itself and enjoy a more diverse and balanced diet. Land is therefore almost 4 times more efficient. Efficiency also increases because in agroforestry systems, yields (which are comparable the first year) do not decline over time as they do very rapidly in slash-and-burn systems. In fact, yields can even increase slightly over time in agroforestry systems. Productivity of labour and of capital is also higher in agroforestry systems. Costs are reduced, especially for fertilizers, because of more organic matter in the soil and better use of nutrients by the plants. At the community level, diversification of production triggers the development of local markets. Consequently, in terms of resource use, agroforestry systems are efficient at safeguarding food security and the environment.
Agroforestry systems are also much more resilient: Yields are less variable, because of better humidity retention. They provide for more diverse production, which ensures in turn a buffer against both the variability of crop yields and price volatility. They offer diversified sources of income, including through selling wood for various uses (and at various time scales), which can also provide a buffer against some economic shocks. They protect the soil from erosion, which is a major concern in these areas. Studies have shown that in agroforestry systems erosion is reduced by a factor of more than 10.
Social protection can play an important role in increasing resilience at household and community level. This is especially true if national systems are designed as comprehensive programmes that exploit the synergies between various instruments in such a way as to cover the specific needs of various groups, especially the more vulnerable, and to be easily scaled up to address any kind of shock.
The notion of resilience is particularly powerful for bringing together interventions that cover different dimensions. Improving the sustainability of forest management not only increases the forest’s resilience, but also contributes to improving water management, protecting the soil from erosion and to conserving agrobiodiversity (e.g. by providing habitat to pollinators). In this way, improvements in the sustainability of forest management contribute to improving the resilience of farming systems.
Efficiency and resilience should be pursued together and at various scales in different agricultural systems and food chains. Being efficient without being resilient will not be helpful over the long term, given that shocks will occur more often due to climate change. Being resilient without being efficient or without allowing for an increase in production, will pose problems for ensuring food security over the long term and for supporting livelihoods. In the pursuit of these two goals, there might be trade-offs, but there will also be synergies. Increasing efficiency could lead to greater sensitivity to certain shocks. For example, more productive livestock is more sensitive to heat waves (Hoffmann, 2010). On the other hand, increased efficiency can be a factor in increasing resilience. For example, increasing production in food importing countries will improve their resilience to price volatility. Increasing soil carbon stocks, enhancing diversity in the field and improving trade are of particular interest with regard to improving efficiency and resilience of food systems.
Increasing soil organic carbon improves both efficiency and resilience. It improves nutrient and water intake by plants, which increases yields and resource efficiency of land, nutrients and water. It also reduces soil erosion and increases water retention, especially as it is often combined with added soil cover, as in conservation agriculture. This combination makes the system more resilient to variability of precipitation and to extreme events. Increasing carbon sinks in the soils also captures carbon, which contributes to climate change mitigation.
By reintroducing native plants that help meet fodder requirements, fix the soil and stop sand encroachment, ecosystems were restored and the local population’s vulnerability to the effects of climatic instability was reduced. After two years of resting, reseeding and planting, birds, insects and animals returned to the area. The rehabilitated ecosystems offered further potential for income generation, as truffles grow in some areas of the Badia, and women could gather them to boost their family incomes. In 2010, a community with a 100 000-ha grazing area could earn up to USD1 million through the sale of truffles.
Higher household incomes provided a basis for the project to diversify income-earning opportunities for women through literacy classes and training courses in new skills such as first aid, food processing and sewing. With households being better off, there is less pressure on young girls to marry early, and as women gain more economic autonomy, they are finding that gender relations are shifting.
Increasing diversity of production at farm and landscape level is an important way to improve the resilience of agricultural systems.
Specialized systems are often presented as being more efficient from an economic point of view, as they generate more income. These systems can benefit from the improved technologies and from economies of scale in the production and distribution of inputs, machines, and especially processing and trade. 
Diversifying production can also improve efficiency in the use of land, as is the case in agroforestry systems for instance and of nutrients with the introduction of legumes in the rotation or in integrated crop/livestock or rice/aquaculture systems.
The Finnish project ADACAPA aims to identify means for assessing and enhancing the adaptive capacity of the Finnish agricultural sector to global environmental and socio-economic changes at various decision-making levels (farm, regional, national). The main hypothesis tested is that increasing diversity enhances resilience and thus adaptive capacity of agrifood systems. Some of the results of studies conducted in the ADACAPA project have shown that diversity can increase income.
Farms that both grow crops and exploit forest generate a higher and more stable income. Regions growing more diverse varieties of barley have a higher average yield than areas growing a single variety. More diversified systems can also spur the development of local markets.
Appropriate policies, institutions and finances are essential to increase systemic resilience and efficiency at local, national and international level and to achieve needed changes in agricultural and food systems. These are detailed below.
There is already a gap today in funding for investment in developing countries. The needs will increase. FAO estimated that cumulative gross investment requirements for agriculture in developing countries add up to nearly US$ 9.2 trillion until 2050 or nearly US$ 210 billion annually (FAO, 2009c). Therefore, the decreasing trend in funding has to be reversed. It includes increasing the share of Official Development Assistance directed to agriculture. Domestic efforts have to be pursued at the appropriate level.
Among the needed investments are important land management schemes and infrastructure, such as local roads and irrigation systems, which are an important source of job creation in rural areas. These public works can be supported by social protection schemes in order to provide work, food and income to food-insecure people. A recent report of the HLPE (2012b) reviews some of these schemes and concludes that public works programmes have proved to be efficient in dealing with covariate shocks and, if they are well designed, can contribute to improving food security.
Climate change will add more risks to production and aggravate existing risks, especially for the more vulnerable. Increased variability and uncertainty make ever more necessary the establishment of risk management strategies to address every type of risk, whether climate, animal or plant diseases or even economic. Such strategies should aim to limit losses ex ante by monitoring risks, assessing vulnerability, identifying (ex-ante) damage reduction measures and acting at the earliest stage of the event. They would include quick reparation of losses to productive assets in order to avoid long-term consequences.
Policies targeted at farmers can include measures aiming at building economic resilience at farm level either by increasing income, enabling saving, by promoting diversification (especially if the risks affecting each activity are not correlated) or by insurance (in certain cases). They also include measures to reduce or eliminate specific risks, such as plant pests and animal diseases, including advanced observation networks for quick response. Other measures either prevent the loss of productive assets, such as feed banks for livestock during droughts, or enable quick recovery, such as availability of seeds.
The efficiency of any specific risk management policy is largely dependent on the existence of enabling policies, institutions, coordination mechanisms, and basic infrastructures. For example, opening markets and adequate transport systems have an important role in diluting the impact of a shock over greater areas.
Land use and management play a crucial role in improving agricultural practices to address food security and climate change. Improving land management, soil fertility, or practices like implementing agro-forestry have long-term benefits but often imply up-front costs either in inputs or labour. Securing land tenure is paramount to enable farmers to benefit from the value added on the land and to encourage them in adopting a long-term perspective. The Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security recently adopted by the Committee on World Food Security promote secure tenure rights and equitable access to land, fisheries and forests as a means of eradicating hunger and poverty, supporting sustainable development and enhancing the environment. They can play an important role.
The changes required in agricultural and food systems will require the creation of supporting institutions and enterprises to provide services and inputs to smallholders, fishermen and pastoralists, and transform and commercialize their production more efficiently. These changes will also require major investments from both public and private sector. For this reason, they will drive economic development and create jobs, especially in rural areas and in countries where agriculture is a major economic sector.
Changes in farming systems should be accompanied by changes all along food chains. For instance, as pointed out by the HLPE increasing diversity in the field often requires changes in consumption patterns. In fact, diversification often requires changes along the entire food chain, from input production and distribution to collection, transformation and commercialization of products. For these reasons, diversification is often more easily carried out as a collective project. Several diversified farms can realize the same economies of scale on each of their production systems as a specialized one. This can lead to the creation of services, for example to share machinery and collect and sell their production.
To improve efficiency and resilience of food systems at every scale requires comprehensive governance, at every level, local, national, regional and international. It shall involve all stakeholders, farmers, agroindustry, retailers, consumers and public authorities.
At a global scale, there is an urgent necessity to better consider the interrelations between agriculture, food security and climate change. The international community needs to establish appropriate links between the international fora discussing food security issues and climate change. Fortunately, this is starting to happen. 
Food security and climate change policies have to be better integrated at every level. Implementing CSA, and particularly adaptation to climate change also requires adequate means to promote collective management of natural resources, such as water or landscape.
The 47 National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA) prepared by the least developed countries provide a rich panorama of adaptation priority measures. These projects are of special interest and relevance because they have been designed and prioritized by the countries themselves. A close analysis of all the categories of projects shows that most of these priority projects are linked to agriculture, including forestry and fisheries.  
Integrating food security and climate change concerns has to be done at every level and pursued at different scales. It also needs to be done on a day-to-day basis at farm level. But it also must be carried out with a long-term perspective at the landscape level and country level to design locally specific, coherent, inclusive and cohesive policy packages.
CSA shares with sustainable development and green economy objectives and guiding principles. It aims also for food security and contributes to preserve natural resources. As such, it has close links with the concept of sustainable intensification, which has been fully developed by FAO for crop production and is now being extended to other sectors and to a food chain approach.
The concept of sustainable development was given prominence by the Brundtland Commission in Our Common Future - Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”. The report’s framing of the concept of sustainable development twinned environmental action with poverty reduction, and helped set the stage for the 1992 Earth Summit and Rio Declaration. The concept recognized the value of the environment, extended the time horizon and emphasized the role of equity. The Brundtland Commission noted that sustainable development embodies two key themes: The idea of “needs”, in particular the essential needs of the world’s poor, to which overriding priority should be given; and The idea of “limitations” imposed by the state of technology and social organization on the environment’s ability to meet present and future needs.
Twenty years after, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, known as Rio + 20 or the Rio Earth Summit 2012, was also held in Rio de Janeiro. While some progress has been made towards sustainable development between 1992 and 2012, large challenges remain as the human footprint on the planet is increasing and some ‘planetary boundaries’ are (or are close to be) crossed. We are now at a time when it is urgent to give a new and more concrete expression to the concept of sustainable development, make it more operational, and pave ways on how to integrate its three (economic, environmental and social) dimensions. This is also why the concept of the ‘green economy’ was developed.
As per the definition of the concept, green economy objectives should resonate with sustainable development agendas, highlighting a concern with human well-being and social equity – both now and for future generations; as well as balancing risks and scarcities faced by peoples across the globe.
Climate-smart agriculture contributes to the goals of making sustainable development concrete. It integrates the three dimensions of sustainable development in addressing food security and climate concerns in a forward-looking perspective. It is guided by the need for more resource efficiency and resilience. These principles are also central in the Rio + 20 outcome document, which recognizes resource efficiency as key to a green economy and affirms the need to enhance agriculture’s resilience.
The green economy and CSA share the common goal of integrating the three dimensions of sustainable development. Both make sustainable development tangible by focusing on issues that can and must be addressed right now in local communities but that have global, long-term consequences.
CSA brings together global and local concerns, climate change to be addressed globally, climate change to get adapted to locally; and first of all, food security, which has to be addressed both locally and globally. To do so it brings together practices, policies and institutions, which are not necessarily new. What is new is the harmonization and synchronization needed of practices and policies in order to address multiple challenges, faced by agriculture and food systems, now and for the future. What is also new is the objective of avoiding contradictory and conflicting policies by internally managing trade-offs and synergies in the pursuit of multiple objectives.
CSA takes into account the four dimensions of food security, availability, accessibility, utilization and stability. Still, the entry point and the emphasis is on production, on farmers, on increasing productivity and income, and on ensuring their stability. As such it is centered on the key dimension of food security, - availability, which is associated with stability. It also has much to do with raising and stabilizing incomes of smallholders, and thus with accessibility to food. Diversification of production is a powerful way to increase efficiency and resilience; it is also an essential path towards more balanced and nutritious diets.
Addressing food security and climate change challenges has to be done in an integrated manner. To increase food production and to reduce emissions intensity, thus contributing to mitigate climate change, food systems have to be more efficient in the use of resources. To ensure food security and adapt to climate change they have to become more resilient.
The changes outlined in this book have to be supported by efforts to harness consumption. Consumption patterns play an important role in the increased demand on agriculture, on the impact of food systems on environment and also on food security. More sustainable patterns of consumption would, in particular, play an essential role to mitigate climate change (HLPE 2012a). Sustainable diets are defined by FAO as “those diets with low environmental impacts that contribute to food and nutrition security and to healthy lives for present and future generations. Sustainable diets are protective and respectful of biodiversity and ecosystems, culturally acceptable, accessible, economically fair and affordable, nutritionally adequate, safe and healthy, while optimizing natural and human resources” (FAO, 2010d). But, to a great extent the tools, policies and institutions that could influence consumption and diets, especially in developed countries, are very different from those that would be used to transform agricultural systems. This is why this book does not address, as such, the issue of consumption patterns as a driver of environmental impact.
CH4: methane 
CGRFA: Commission on Genetic Reources for Food and Agriculture
CLCPRO: Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Western Region 
CSA: climate-smart agriculture
CO2: carbon dioxide 
EIT: Economies in Transition
EMBRAPA: Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation
EMPRES:Emergency Prevention System 
FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FSCA: Food Security for Commercialisation for Agriculture
GDP: gross domestic product 
GFFB: Good Father Fishery Based Organization
GHG: greenhouse gas
HLPE: High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition
IDP: internally displaced persons
IFAD: International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFDC: International Fertilizer Development Center
IFPRI: International Food Policy Research Institute 
IPCC: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
IRRI: International Rice Research Institute
N2O: nitrous oxide 
NAPA: National Adaptation Programmes of Action 
NGO: non-governmental organization
NLCUs: National Locust Control Units
NPFS: National Program for Food Security 
OECD: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
ORAM: Rural Association for Mutual Support
REDD  Reducing Emission from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
SBSTA: Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice
SCP: sustainable consumption and production
SCPI :sustainable crop production intensification 
SIDS: Small Island States 
UDP: urea deep placement
UNCED: United Nations Conference on Environment and Development 
UNCTAD: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
UN DESA: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
UNEP: United Nations Environment Programme 
UNCSD: United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development 
UNFCCC: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNIDO: United Nations Industrial Development Organization
CSA provides opportunities, but also presents considerable challenges. To seize these opportunities and meet these challenges, a more holistic, integrated approach in which all stakeholders participate actively is required. An integrated approach ensures greater efficiency in the use of resources and more sustainable management of natural and human-created processes in the landscape. Production systems must be incorporated into landscapes, in ways that capitalize on natural biological processes, recycle waste and residues and create integrated and diversified farming systems. This integration can greatly reduce the pressure on the natural resources and minimize the need for external inputs (e.g. energy, chemical fertilizers and pesticides) and other management interventions.
The landscape approach is key to achieving the multiple objectives of CSA. In a landscape approach, the management of production systems and natural resources covers an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services and small enough so the action can be carried out by the people using the land and producing those services. 
A landscape approach builds on the principles of natural resource management systems that recognize the value of ecosystem services to multiple stakeholders. The principles that underpin the landscape approach provide guidance on how to pursue different land-use objectives and livelihood strategies (MEA, 2005). More recently, the term ‘landscape approach’ has been redefined to include societal concerns related to conservation and development trade-offs. It also includes increased integration of poverty alleviation, agricultural production and food security. The approach puts the emphasis on adaptive management, stakeholder involvement and the simultaneous achievement of multiple objectives (Sunderland, 2012). 
Experiences have shown that by managing natural resources in a way that ensures the resilience of ecosystems, it will be possible to reverse natural resource degradation, safeguard agricultural productivity and maintain ecosystem services (e.g. the provision of water, pests and disease control, pollination and climate regulation). Healthy ecosystems are the basis for sustainable agriculture, forestry and fisheries. To achieve healthy ecosystems, participatory and people-centered approaches and management structures are needed. This approach will simultaneously improve the resilience of production systems and people’s livelihoods.
All civilizations are based on human-managed farming, forestry and fishery systems. Converting land from forests to fields and pastures has on occasion created more diverse ecosystems. In many areas, however, it has also led to environmental degradation, loss of many vital environmental services and the loss of biodiversity. To date, agricultural expansion has cleared or converted 70 percent of grasslands; 50 percent of savannahs; 45 percent of temperate deciduous forest; and 27 percent of tropical forests (Foley et al., 2011). 
Many current agricultural production systems are based on vast monocultures that rely on a small number of plants and varieties with a very narrow genetic base. The cultivation of these monocultures depends heavily on the use fossil fuels. These systems also fail to close the nutrient cycles. Many production systems are not sustainable because of their environmentally-damaging soil management practices and their wasteful use of water resources. Also, in some agricultural production systems, there is a significant gap between the technical yield potential and actual yields. Because of this untapped potential, pressure to convert forest land to fields and pastures continues to increase. 
Based on the current trends, food supply will need to grow by another 60 percent by 2050 to meet the demands of a more populous, more urbanized and more affluent world. At the same time, agricultural production systems will face increasing competition for resources with other sectors. In fact, expanding cities, infrastructure and human activities will infringe on fertile agricultural lands.
Climate change is affecting production systems, disrupting the functioning of ecosystems and increasing the pressure on ecosystem services. In some areas, climate change may also lead to new production possibilities as the long-term impacts may open up new options for agriculture. The frequency of extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods, are predicted to increase. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the impacts of climate change and associated costs will fall disproportionately on developing countries and may undermine the achievement of the global goals of reducing poverty and safeguarding food security (IPCC, 2001). The 2011 drought in the Horn of Africa, which threatened 12 million people with malnutrition, disease and loss of livelihoods, is a recent example of an extreme weather event. As such events become more frequent, the number of vulnerable or directly affected people will increase.
Large-scale environmental degradation is not inevitable and can be reversed (Bai et al., 2008). The Global Assessment of Land Degradation and Improvement (FAO and ISRIC, 2008) established that while land degradation was still spreading between 1991 and 2008, the trend was not clear cut. There are areas where land quality has been declining (24 percent of the global land surface), but also areas where land quality has improved (16 percent) (Steenbergen et al., 2011). The reversal from degradation to sustainable production has in some cases been very rapid, taking only a matter of years. In many cases, these reversals have been made in areas where populations have increased. There are many examples that illustrate that it is possible to realize the scenario: ‘more people, more trees, more livestock, more water, better lives and better economies’ (e.g. see Critchley, 2010 and Box 2.1). 
In the 1970s and 80s, the Sahel region experienced disastrous droughts that caused widespread famine. However, over the past three decades, helped by moderate increases in rainfall, hundreds of thousands of farmers in Burkina Faso and Niger have transformed arid landscapes into productive agricultural land by modifying traditional agroforestry, water and soil management practices. This ‘re-greening’ of the Sahel began when local agricultural practices were rediscovered and enhanced in simple, low-cost ways by innovative farmers and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). An evolving coalition of local, national, and international actors promoted the dissemination and continued use of these improved practices. Policy changes regarding land tenure, and changes in opportunities for off-farm employment also contributed to the progress.
To improve water availability and soil fertility in Burkina Faso’s Central Plateau, farmers have sown crops in planting pits and built stone contour bunds. In southern Niger, farmers have developed innovative ways of regenerating and multiplying valuable trees. These lands now support increasing amounts of trees, crops, and livestock, which has enhanced the food security of about 3 million people. Water levels in wells has increased significantly, and some farmers can maintain small vegetable gardens near the wells, which adds to their incomes and improves nutrition. Although millet and sorghum remain the dominant crops, farmers working on rehabilitated land are also growing cowpea and sesame. With increased quantities of fodder and crop residues, farmers can keep livestock closer to their fields in more intensive and profitable livestock production systems. The manure can then be used as fertilizer to improve soil fertility. These innovations have also greatly improved the supply of fuelwood over the past 20 to 30 years, allowing women to reallocate the time once spent on collecting fuelwood to other activities.
The ultimate aim of CSA is to improve livelihoods and sustainably increase productivity through the efficient use of resources. In management planning at the landscape level, diverse groups and institutions work together to increase farm incomes and diversify economic opportunities while ensuring that natural resources are used efficiently and that ecosystem functions and services are protected. One of the primary benefits of placing efforts on coordination at the landscape level is that sectors and production systems that had previously been managed separately and often counterproductively can be integrated in ways that maintain vital ecosystem services needed for all sectors.
To achieve food security and better livelihoods in the agricultural sector, ecosystems need to remain in a productive state. They need to deliver a variety of resources and processes that are crucial for crop, livestock, forest and aquatic production systems and rural livelihoods. Productivity depends on ecosystem functioning, which builds on the processes shaped by interactions among biological communities of both wild and domesticated species, and biophysical processes, such as water regulation and nutrient cycling. Ecosystem functioning ultimately ensures the delivery of ecosystem services.
Ecosystem services are generally classified according to the benefits that they deliver: provisioning services (e.g the provision of food, fiber, energy and water); regulating services (e.g. the regulation of pest and disease outbreaks, the cycling and purification of water or regulation of greenhouse gas [GHG] emissions and carbon sequestration); supporting services (e.g. pollination and nutrient recycling); and cultural services (MEA, 2005). The provisioning services depend upon a wide variety of supporting and regulatory services, such as soil fertility and pollination (MEA, 200) that determine the underlying biophysical capacity of agro-ecosystems. Biodiversity underpins all ecosystem services. A rich genetic base increases the likelihood that there will be species present in the system that have the traits necessary to fulfil different functional roles in the ecosystem and allow the continued delivery of ecosystem services in a changing climate (see also table 2.1 and more on genetic resources in Module 6).
Sustainable production intensification (SPI) is an important tool for increasing production in climate-smart systems. SPI saves natural resources, time and money by increasing the efficiency of farming systems. More is produced with less inputs by applying appropriate inputs at the right time and in the right amount, optimizing resource use and reducing waste. SPI uses knowledge-intensive approaches, such as conservation agriculture, integrated plant nutrient management, integrated pest management, water management and pollination management.
Similarly, organic agriculture is a holistic production management system that promotes and enhances agroecosystem health, including biodiversity, biological cycles and soil biological activity (FAO, 2009). It builds on many of the principles of SPI, but it covers the whole food system, from production to labeling and commercialization according to precise standards.
The ecosystem approaches to fisheries and aquaculture (EAFA) are holistic strategies for managing capture fisheries and aquaculture that integrate ecological, socio-economic and governance dimensions. These strategies facilitate the sustainable use of natural resources and the integration of fisheries and aquaculture with other production sectors in coastal ecosystems (also see Case Study 2.3 and Module 10 on fisheries and aquaculture).
Greater frequency of extreme events, increased temperatures, changes in rainfall patterns and greater intensity of rainfalls that are expected to result from climate change will increase uncertainty and risk in agricultural production. Long-term changes in temperature will slowly lead to fundamental changes in the plant and animal species that can be used for agriculture in a particular location. The emergence of new pests and diseases as well as new trading patterns are likely. To cope with these changes, land users need to be flexible and develop a learning attitude. The diversification of production and the management of natural resources at the landscape level provides this flexibility and facilitates risk management.
Improving productivity and livelihoods in a sustainable way can only be achieved by safeguarding the productivity of the natural resource base on which these livelihoods and production systems depend. For this reason, the foundation of CSA is resilient livelihoods and ecosystems. Resilience is the capacity to adapt to changes and disturbances and, at the same time, maintain core functions. Key strategies for ensuring that agriculture can adapt to change include: sustainable soil and water management practices; the active promotion of biodiversity; and the diversification of income sources inside and outside the farms.
Climate change will have an impact, be it positive or negative, on all production systems. Every system will have to adapt. This can happen spontaneously by adjusting to the changes as they come or in a planned manner in which the potential impacts are assessed and actions are taken to improve short- and long-term resilience. Adaptation efforts must build the capacity to cope with increasingly difficult conditions and gradual changes in climate (FAO, 2011b).
Management approaches should aim to keep the system in a state that will allow it to continue delivering valued ecosystem goods and services, or if necessary to move towards more resilient, productive systems. Both risk management and change management form an integral part of these approaches. Disaster risk management focuses on preventing, mitigating, preparing for and responding to shocks in short- and medium-time scales. Change management adds a strategic, long-term objective to policy, legal and research frameworks (FAO, 2011b). Fisher et al. (2006) outline ten guiding principles for protecting biodiversity, ecosystem functioning and resilience in commodity production landscapes.
Principles for protecting biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and resilience in commodity production landscapes include: pattern-oriented management strategies, such as maintaining and creating large, structurally complex patches of native vegetation throughout the landscape; creating corridors, stepping stones and buffers around sensitive areas; and maintaining heterogeneity across environmental gradients. Process-oriented management strategies to target specific key species or environmental processes are recommended. Strategic activities include: maintaining key species’ interactions and functional diversity; understanding the impacts that particular disturbances have on ecosystems; controlling aggressive, over-abundant, and invasive species; minimizing specific threats, such as chemical pollution or hunting; and maintaining species of particular concern.
Water management and the efficient use of available water will be of fundamental importance in building resilient production systems and improving the management of climate change-induced risks (see also Module 3 on water management). The efficient and equitable management of water catchments is generally only possible when done in a landscape context and combined with farm-level water management practices. Water management requires common agreements on the modalities of use. These agreements will be best achieved through participatory governance processes related to integrated land-use planning. Large catchments, such as river basins, need layers of nested planning approaches, starting at the river basin scale, with implementation activities planned in detail on the landscape scale.
Maintaining high levels of genetic diversity is fundamental to decrease risk, ensure multiple needs are met and maintain stability. This is why many small-scale farmers continue growing traditional crop varieties even if improved varieties are available (Frison et al., 2011). It is also widely recognized that maintaining crop diversity in production systems is crucial to avoid vulnerability and widespread crop loss resulting from particular biotic or abiotic threats (Wolfe, 2000). Likewise, the diversity of livestock and soil micro-organisms will improve the resilience of the farming systems. Promoting genetic diversity and diverse production strategies for risk management, including climate risks, is a crucial component of promoting CSA (see Module 6 on genetic resources). Equally important is the biodiversity in the production system and in the landscape. This is also critical, for example, for pollination services.
Successful integration of biodiversity conservation into agricultural production is fundamental to maintain functioning ecosystems. For this reason, protected areas are important tools in many landscape and ecosystem approaches. However, establishing protected areas is often not feasible, especially in densely populated areas.
Pollination is an essential ecosystem service for crop production. Over 75 percent of the leading global food crops are dependent on pollination services provided by animals. The global monetary value of this service has been estimated to US$ 214 billion per year. Pollinators, especially bees, affect 35 percent of world crop production. Many pollinators and the crops that are dependent on them are sensitive to high temperatures and drought. In the tropics, most pollinators are already living close to their optimal range of temperature tolerance. Temperatures are expected to increase from 1.1-6.4 °C in the course of the 21st century. Consquently, climate change may have detrimental effects on pollination. CSA implemented on the landscape level can help protect this vital ecosystem service by building the agro-ecosystem’s resilience through the protection of the species, resources and processes that control ecosystem functioning.
Many agricultural and land management systems and practices (e.g. sustainable land management, agroforestry and integrated food-energy systems) are climate smart. They increase the carbon content of the soils and aboveground biomass and enhance productivity and resilience. Mitigation co-benefits can be enhanced through integrated landscape management by seizing mitigation opportunities of any particular landscape through increased biomass production.
Sustainably increasing or intensifying productivity offers important opportunities for mitigating climate change by decreasing deforestation, rehabilitating eroded soils and reducing pressure on surrounding natural ecosystems. Similarly, holistic management of grassland ecosystems will help to regenerate degraded areas and improve vegetation cover. Grassland management can also be accompanied by the introduction of trees, which sequester carbon in the soils and biomass. Improved grazing management (management that increases production) can lead to an increase of soil carbon stocks (Conant, 2009) (more on livestock management in Module 8). If their biological processes are preserved, valuable ecosystems like wetlands and peatlands perform important water regulatory services and constitute a large carbon sink (see Box 2.4). Landscape-level land-use planning strategies need to identify these kinds of key ecosystems and protect the high value of the ecosystem services they provide in their natural state. Special attention should also be paid to the management of organic soils as their emission potential is significant. 
Different sectoral policies may have different goals regarding land use. Climate change mitigation policies aim at reducing emissions from all sectors including land use. Agricultural and national development policies aim at food security and economic development. At landscape level these policy goals can conflict. CSA and landscape management help to solve these conflicst by aiming at increasing productivity on cultivated areas, to relieve pressure on forests through sustainable agricultural intensification and to increase the carbon content of the landscapes (see also Module 9 on forestry). A transparent, participatory governance system is vital for arbitrating between these different goals.
In the area of land use-planning and environment policy, there is widespread acceptance that integrating decisions across all land-use sectors (i.e. agriculture, forestry, aquaculture and their supporting ecosystem services) is crucial for sustainable development (Geerlinsg and Steed, 2003). This is why the landscape approach is recommended for implementing CSA. Combining the efforts from different land-use sectors, all of which are affected by climate change, will lead to greater progress towards reaching sustainable development goals. This will require a shift from single-objective production systems to the management of the entire landscape to meet CSA’s multiple objectives. An integrated approach is particularly important as resources are limited and the demand for goods and services are high. CSA requires cross-sectoral planning and management to make the most efficient use of valuable natural resources. 
In addition, integration across multiple administrative levels (local, subnational, national and international) is crucial for sustaining landscape interventions. Bottom-up approaches are necessary to ensure local stakeholders have ownership over landscape management, are accountable for the results and are able to reap tangible benefits. However, the climate-smart management of resources at the local level can only succeed if subnational and national governments are involved in the process and can create an enabling policy and institutional environment. Stakeholders at all levels must identify, negotiate, and manage the benefits and impacts of different land uses to ensure that the envisioned goals materialize at the local level (Scherr et al., 2012). This process must also recognize the connections that link rural, peri-urban and urban communities, including peri-urban and urban forests, gardens, farms and open spaces that tie landscapes together in a mosaic of natural green spaces. 
Although the landscape approach, which involves multisector and multistakeholder interventions across multiple scales, makes planning and management challenging, there are no other options for achieving CSA’s goals (Holmgren, 2012).
In a landscape approach, the management of production systems and natural resources covers an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services, but small enough to be managed by the people using the land producing those services. However, there are many definitions of the term ‘landscape’. It is important to delineate the common elements of a successful landscape approach and to describe how it can be a viable strategy for achieving CSA.
Тhe Council of Europe (COE) defines a landscape as “an area, as perceived by people, whose character is the result of the action and interaction of natural and/or human factors” (COE, 2000). Cultural landscapes have been defined by the World Heritage Committee as “distinct geographical areas or properties uniquely representing the combined work of nature and of man, illustrative of the evolution of human society and settlement over time, under the influence of the physical constraints and/or opportunities presented by their natural environment and of successive social, economic and cultural forces, both external and internal” (WHC 1996). Expanding on this, landscapes may be defined as the concrete and characteristic products of the interaction between human societies and culture with the natural environment. 
Agricultural landscapes can be described in terms of the three elements: structure, which concerns the interaction between environmental features, land-use patterns and human-made objects; functions, which are the provision of environmental services for farmers and society; and the values society puts on agricultural landscapes and the costs of maintaining and enhancing landscape provisions by agriculture (Jongman, 2004). Because the underlying human and natural processes are subject to change and evolution, landscapes are ‘dynamic systems’ (Washer et al., 1999).
People have been managing the world’s natural resources and landscapes for generations to meet multiple needs, including food, fibre, fodder, fuel, building materials, medicinal products and water. Farming, forestry and fisheries systems have evolved and adapted to variable environmental conditions and population pressures. These systems have been influenced by other factors, such as settlement patterns, tenure arrangements, labour availability and resource, credit and market access. Because of these complex interactions, there is a huge diversity of natural, semi-natural and man-made landscapes that contain many differently sized livelihood systems.
Integrated landscape planning and management is an umbrella term for natural resource management that recognizes the value of various ecosystem services to multiple stakeholders, and how different values can lead stakeholders to pursue different land-use objectives or livelihood strategies (MEA, 2005). More recently, the term has been re-defined to also include societal concerns related to conservation and development trade-offs, including increased integration of poverty alleviation goals, increased integration of agricultural production and food security with an emphasis on adaptive management, stakeholder involvement and multiple objectives (Sunderland, 2012). The common underlying philosophy of integrated landscape planning and management is to find and promote synergies among production systems, livelihoods, biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services, with the ultimate goal of ensuring sustainability. 
This type of planning and management needs to be supported by governance structures, including policies and financial mechanisms that are all part of a multilevel governance process. This support would be incomplete without a comprehensive, participatory and user-friendly system for monitoring landscape management and assessing the progress being made towards reaching different objectives. Indicators in a landсcape monitoring system could include biomass, income, and biodiversity.
The Land Degradation Assessment in Drylands (LADA) project has developed a methodology and tools for assessing a number of factors relating to land management, including: the status and trends in land resources; the drivers of land degradation and sustainable land management (SLM); impacts on ecosystem services and livelihoods; and the effects of response measures adopted by land users and promoted by different stakeholders. The methodology shifts attention from the conventional focus, which assesses the biophysical aspects of land degradation, to a balanced assessment that looks at both negative and positive effects of land management, trends in land use and management of natural resources, as well as ecosystem services and livelihoods. The methodology integrates socio-economic aspects into land-use planning and management.
The main emphasis of the assessment is on the current status and dynamics of land resources (e.g. soil, water and vegetation) and the delivery of the main provisioning services for livelihoods (e.g. food, fodder, fuel, water, income). A second important consideration is the need to identify and evaluate the significant impacts of land management practices on the supporting and regulating ecosystem services that determine productivity and ecosystem resilience (e.g. soil nutrients and organic matter, carbon cycling, maintenance of the hydrological cycle and water supply and the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity). Besides income and food security, other socio-cultural factors (e.g. knowledge management, the capacity of land users to organize themselves and adapt to change) are considered.
The LADA approach is intended to enhance the capacity of users to conduct integrated and participatory assessments of land degradation, and monitor the impacts of interventions or changes in land management. As it serves as a baseline diagnostic, the assessment should be undertaken at the beginning of the SLM investment planning for integrated landscape management. By identifying the most suitable SLM practices for preventing and mitigating degradation through participatory discussions with the communities and stakeholders, the assessment results can be used to inform SLM interventions and improve their design, planning and implementation. The assessment can be fed into national inventories and contribute to national agricultural and environmental strategies and reports to international conventions.
It is worth investing time and effort early in the participatory process in order to build trust and collaboration when planning landscapes. It may also be necessary to adopt new practices and ways of thinking at the farm level and modify governance structures (e.g. land tenure regimes and decentralization). 
A participatory process can strengthen stakeholders’ sense of ownership of the objectives of landscape management and encourage them to engage in defined activities. However, engaging in a participatory process is often time consuming. Results may not be perceived immediately as processes of social change can take generations. It is therefore important that stakeholders involved in the process, especially those that do not live in the area, tolerate uncertainty and see landscape management as a long-term activitiy. However, landscape management also needs to achieve some short-term results that can provide stakeholders with incentives to continue the process. In view of limitations in time and resources, external project interventions have to be catalytic in nature, triggering change while ensuring inclusiveness.
Carrying out interrelated actions at different levels also means making trade-offs. Managing natural resources and community needs at a landscape level involves linking actions undertaken on smaller land units to land-use management at the broader landscape level. For example, there are trade-offs that may need to be made between increasing productivity and reducing GHG emissions, and between different land uses (e.g. harvesting nontimber products and logging in forests). Defining, evaluating and balancing different legitimate interests and objectives to create a common vision is central to integrated landscape management. A shared vision ensures that there is alignment among the various local management and production strategies, national development strategies, climate and environmental strategies, as well as among policies, institutions and other enabling structures.
When discussions about change become the core of the planning process, they are expected to lead to behavioural changes and sustainable outcomes (Sangha Group, 2008). To ensure that they can participate actively in policy and decision-making processes, local stakeholders should receive the support they need to ensure that they can protect their rights and livelihood choices. 
The contractual agreement emerging from this negotiated process is the result of a participatory process, which includes plans for local development activities or initiatives (short, medium, and long term) that are defined by different stakeholders in a given landscape. To implement this contractual agreement, external support may be required to build capacities and create opportunities to access resources. In addition to concrete agreement on activities, institutional arrangements and the distribution of resources, the negotiated process also leads to improved social cohesion within the communities in the landscape. The least powerful stakeholders gain increased bargaining power to defend their interests. The process also incorporates the diversity of stakholders’ interests that might otherwise not be voiced and integrated in decision-making processes (more on local institutions in Module 12).
Both policy-makers and land users gain from organized and democratic planning that aligns land use with local and national goals. Ideally, land-use planning is a countrywide effort, from grassroot villages through districts and provinces, that harmonizes local needs with national priorities. Relevant stakeholders may include village and municipal authorities, private sector interests, district authorities and members of the country’s planning ministry or national planning commission. At the local level, it is important that all community groups are represented, including men and women, young and old, wealthy and poor, farmers and herders (FAO, 2009).
Many of the factors that drive land-use change operate or interact in different geographic areas and at different time scales. It is necessary to apply a planning framework that links these diverse planning processes (for example see Case Study 2.8 in section 2.3). If planning is made at the national or regional level without the involvement of local stakeholders, the chances that the implementation of planned activities will not be successful or sustainable increase. Conversely, activities planned at the landscape or community level that are not supported by enabling policies or governmental authorities may struggle to succeed due to a variety of factors, including, insufficient land tenure, poor infrastructure, and inadequate institutional and market structures. Policies should be developed to support the planning processes at local levels and allow communities to manage and benefit from the resources on the land where they live.
Planning for sustainable management of transboundary resources, such as water and animal species, requires coordination among stakeholders with competing claims, and among the institutions, laws and policies intended to create incentives for the sustainable use of resources. When land-use planning takes place at both macro- and micro-levels, national and local goals can be harmonized.
Adaptive management for climate-smart agricultural landscapes should be characterized by a sound understanding of ecosystem dynamics and take a flexible approach to governance that considers policies as works in progress and management actions as experiments that encourage learning and adjustments. As changes become apparent, new information is gained and incorporated into management processes. This allows for the review and revision of objectives and management strategies. The monitoring of drivers of change in the landscape is crucial for generating the data that can enable robust learning and adaptation. 
Gathering information is all the more important considering that local stakeholders face high uncertainties about the impacts of environmental processes. They are also facing rapid economic and technological changes that can have dramatic effects on their livelihoods. In addition, local communities may have to react to new institutional and governance processes, such as more decentralized government administration or the increased involvement of the private sector. Social processes change with economic and institutional change. Box 2.7 presents a case where local citizens became involved in the discussions and the decision-making process regarding ecosystem and landscape management in an urban context.
Landscape management is an iterative and evolving process. Over time, key assumptions underpinning the work and new elements will need to be re-examined. The participatory process should be a learning process in which social dialogue is constantly being renewed to bring about negotiated agreements involving all stakeholders. For the process to be easily understood and to allow stakeholder involvement in all phases, it needs to be coherent and feasible given the available resources. The process should also be simple and practical and ensure transparency and accountability, so that all stakeholders can meet their responsibilities.
For climate finance in rural landscapes to be effective, the interventions need to be coordinated with local rural development activities.
It is necessary to measure and monitor the multiple benefits of interventions designed to establish climate-smart landscapes. Monitoring objectives must be locally defined, and cover livelihoods, biodiversity and ecosystem services. The principles and processes of monitoring should be agreed upon at the beginning of a consultative, participatory process when embarking on a landscape plan addressing multiple objectives. Right from the outset, all stakeholders should have a common understanding about the objectives to be met. The monitoring process also needs to be user-friedly.
Monitoring becomes especially important if the multiple objectives within the landscape and close relationships among different users leads to conflict. For example, agriculture is an important driver of deforestation and needs to be treated in REDD+ policies to address the multiple objectives of the land users. No single strategy can both protect forest cover over the long-term and support agricultural development. Plans dealing with these closely related issues must be made on a case-by-case basis and require site-specific analysis to predict the impact of forest and agricultural interventions. 
A landscape approach for measuring and monitoring biodiversity, climate change mitigation, ecosystem health and local livelihoods, which focuses on large, ecologically and agriculturally diverse areas, can help to ensure that impacts are truly being felt on the ground and that the tradeoffs being made are acceptable to all stakeholders. The results of this monitoring, particularly on the status of compensation, the distribution of benefits, and the impacts on rights and conflict resolution, will need to be transparent and easily accessible to all stakeholders.
The landscape approach has an important role to play in transitioning to CSA. It is an integrated approach that aims at the sustainable management of natural and human-maintained processes in the landscape. Instead of separate and often counterproductive management of various sectors, it calls for the alignment of sectoral policies and their coordinated implementation. Adoption of participatory and people-centred approaches and management structures contributes to improving the resilisence of the agro-ecosytem and the livelihoods of the people who depend on it. Scaling up the landscape approach requires an enabling policy and market environment, adequate governance structures as well as improved knowledge management and heightened institutional capacity. Different landscapes require different approaches that will depend on the state and nature of the resources, current land-use dynamics, and social and economic conditions. 
Most of the impacts of climate change on agriculture are expected to result from changes in the water cycle. Because of this, the design of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) strategies will need to be viewed though a ‘water lens’.
Climate change will affect both rainfed and irrigated agriculture through increased crop evapotranspiration, changes in the amount of rainfall, and variations in river runoff and groundwater recharge. The impact of climate change on water use in agriculture must be considered within a wider context in which a number of issues are taken into account including: increased water demand by all sectors; the degradation of water quality; and heightened competition for water at various levels (community, river basin and aquifer). 
Climate change adaptation in water includes a range of response options related to policies, investments, water management, and institutional and technical factors. These options will need to be applied at different scales: on fields and farms; in irrigation schemes; in watersheds or aquifers; in river basins and at the national level. 
Climate-proofing will have to become central in the design of future investment plans in water for agriculture. It will become necessary to maintain a clear perspective on resilience when screening water development programmes. When designing development policies it will be necessary to systematically consider how the policies may be affected by climate change. In many cases, the challenge will be to combine more efficient use of water with increased resilience of production systems.
It is commonly acknowledged that most of the impacts from climate change will relate to water (UN-Water, 2010). How water is managed will be at the centre of climate change adaptation strategies. This is particularly true in rural areas and in the agriculture sector, where water plays a critical role in crop and animal production (including fish), and the management of ecosystems, including forests, rangeland and cropland. There is also scope for climate change mitigation actions in water management for agriculture. 
The most immediate impact of climate change on water for agriculture will be through the increased variability of rainfall, higher temperatures, and associated extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods. In the medium to long term, climate change will affect water resources and reduce the availability or reliability of water supplies in many places already subject to water scarcity. This impact must be considered in the bigger picture of water scarcity and agricultural development in which other factors are driving changes in water use at a much faster pace than climate change. Climate change is expected to bring additional burdens on already stressed systems. 
Addressing risks associated with climate change requires an understanding of the potential water-related impacts of climate change and the vulnerability of rural populations. Vulnerability, sensitivity, adaptability, resilience and exposure vary depending on the agricultural system and the importance of agriculture for the national economy. These two factors are reviewed below as a basis for action. 
There is a range of possible response options to adapt to climate change. These options can be related to policies, investments, water management, and institutional and technical factors, both within the water and agriculture sectors and beyond. To have optimal impact, these options must be used in combinations that are tailored to different contexts. Focus should be placed on major systems at risk. However, there is also a need to assess the vulnerability of different categories of rural people to identify priority actions.
Although agriculture is highly dependent on climate, so far evidence of observed changes related to regional climate changes, and specifically to water, has been difficult to find. One of the reasons for this is that agriculture is strongly influenced by factors unrelated to climate, especially management practices, technological advances, market prices and agricultural policies. These factors have more immediate impacts on water than those induced by climate change (Bates et al., 2008). For this reason, it is important to understand the current status of water management in agriculture before assessing the potential impact of climate change. 
Over the last 50 years, heightened demand for food, fibers and other agricultural products has been met mostly by an increase in agricultural productivity. The expansion of agricultural land has remained relatively limited. Total cultivated land increased by only 12 percent between 1961 and 2009, but productivity more than doubled. The amount of land needed to produce food for one person has decreased from 0.45 hectares in 1961 to 0.22 hectares in 2009. During the same period, the extent of irrigated land has more than doubled, increasing from 139 to 301 million hectares (FAO, 2011a). By providing farmers with access to water, irrigation has been a key factor in agricultural intensification. The expansion of irrigated land is expected to continue in the future as farmers will increasingly look for greater control over production factors.
With the doubling of irrigated area, water withdrawal for agriculture has been rising sharply. Globally, agricultural water withdrawal represents 70 percent of all withdrawals. However, as water resources are very unevenly distributed, the impact of these withdrawals varies substantially between countries and regions. An increasing number of the world’s river basins have reached conditions of water scarcity through the combined pressure of agriculture and other sectors. FAO (2011a) estimates that more than 40 percent of the world’s rural population lives in river basins that are classified as water scarce. 
The high level of pressure on water resources has had serious impacts on water users and the environment. Competition over water use is growing in river basins where there are no measures in place for arbitrating conflicts. Evidence shows that biodiversity is declining more rapidly for freshwater-dependent species than for species from other types of ecosystems (Comprehensive Assessment, 2007). The large-scale public surface irrigation systems built during the green revolution dominated the landscape until the early 1980s and had a profound impact on the flow of many rivers. Over the last 30 years, private investments, stimulated by the availability of cheap pumps and well drilling capacity, have been directed to tapping groundwater. Consequently, aquifers are being depleted in countries with key agricultural production systems, including China, India, and the United States.
Water demand from cities and industries has been booming as a result of rapid economic growth in emerging countries. This growth has put pressure on irrigation schemes to release water for urban and industrial users. Pollution from agriculture, cities and industries has affected rivers and aquifers and further reduced the amount of water available for use. The trends towards an increasing demand for water from all sectors is expected to continue in the coming decades as the population reaches 9 billion people in 2050 and economic growth increases the consumption of food and manufactured goods. 
The role climate change will play with regards to water in agriculture must be considered in this context of rapid increases in water withdrawals, the degradation of water quality and the competition for water at all levels. The following sections look at the current state of knowledge about climate change impacts on water resources and the demand for these resources. These impacts are framed within the overall perspective of the current status, trends and challenges of water management in agriculture. Of particular interest are aspects of change that are specific to climate and as such require specific responses.
A global increase in atmospheric temperatures is predicted to affect agricultural productivity. Particularly affected will be areas in low latitudes, where temperatures are already high. In these areas, heat waves will affect both crops and animals. An increase in temperatures will trigger increased demand for water for evapotranspiration by crops and natural vegetation, and will lead to more rapid depletion of soil moisture. This scenario, combined with changes in rainfall patterns, may lead to more frequent crop failures.
Changes in the distribution of precipitation, with longer periods between rainfall events and more intense precipitation, are expected everywhere. This may lead to increased occurrence of extreme weather events, including floods and droughts. Dry spells, the short periods of rainfall deficit during the cropping season, are expected to increase in duration and frequency. This will directly affect soil moisture and the productivity of rainfed crops. Such changes will be felt mostly in areas already subject to climate variability, such as in the semi-arid and sub-humid areas of sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where, in the absence of alternative sources of water, the risk of increased frequency of crop failures is high. 
Reductions of rainfall in arid and semi-arid areas will translate into a much larger reduction in river runoff (in relative terms). In Cyprus, for example, analyses have shown that a 13 percent reduction in rainfall translates into a 34 percent reduction in runoff (Faurès et al., 2010). In rivers receiving their water from glacier or snow melt (about 40 percent of the world’s irrigation is supported by flows originating in the Himalayas), the timing of flows will change, with high flows occurring earlier in the year. However, the mean annual runoff may be less affected.
The impact of climate change on groundwater recharge is difficult to predict. Local recharge will depend on the characteristics of the aquifer, the recharging processes and changes in rainfall. It is likely, however, that aquifer recharge will be reduced in arid and semi-arid areas, where runoff will decline (Bates et al., 2008; Turral et al., 2011).
Finally, the expected rise in sea levels will affect agriculture in coastal areas, particularly river deltas. Higher sea levels combined with upstream changes (variations in runoff distribution, more frequent floods), will result in an increased incidence of floods and saltwater intrusion in estuaries and aquifers.
In arid and semi-arid areas, climate change will place additional burdens on already stretched water resources. However, agriculture will first need to respond to the challenges posed by increasing human pressures on these resources. In other places, climate change will be the main driver of change and will necessitate specific climate change-related responses. Table 3.1 is an attempt to present the relative importance of climate change and development on water supply and demand for agriculture. The relative impacts of climate change will vary from one agricultural system to another, but it is important that adaptation strategies take into account the overall context in which they are to be implemented. 
Of particular relevance is the time frame for climate change and its relation to the speed of change driven by development. Annual changes in runoff and recharge due to climate change are expected to occur at a slower pace than changes caused by human demands for water. However, changes in variability and extreme events associated with climate change may already be having impacts and deserve particular attention for short- to medium-term responses.
The distinction between rainfed and irrigated production systems will dictate the impacts and associated risks related to climate change. Rainfed systems in sub-tropics and semi-arid tropics will be mostly affected by changes in rainfall patterns and temperatures. These changes will lead to greater frequency of crop failures as a result of increased variations in soil moisture. In mountainous areas, rainfed farming in marginal areas will also be affected by the impact of extreme events, including intense rainfalls, floods and erosion. Pastoral areas will suffer from more frequent drying of water points and greater variability in available animal feed.
Irrigated systems are better protected against rainfall variability. But these systems will increasingly require greater storage capacity to respond to more frequent droughts and floods and changes in the annual distribution of runoff. For surface or groundwater systems already being over-exploited, climate change will add an extra burden to water management and generally lead to a reduction in the availability of water and greater competition for water resources. 
Aquatic systems and capture fisheries will be affected by changes in quantity and quality of freshwater, which will have an impact on production. Many aquatic species depend on the timing of rainfall and flood events for important migrations (e.g. spawning and feeding). Changes in precipitation may disrupt these migrations or force these species to make adaptations in their life history patterns. Integrated irrigation systems (e.g. rice and fish) could see changes in system components as climate change alters the suitability of the environment, (e.g. more or less water may require different species of fish). Increased storage (i.e. more or larger reservoirs) could promote integration of fish farming through cage culture and enhance the fisheries production (see also Module 10 on fisheries and aquaculture). 
The current level of uncertainty associated with the impact of climate change on water availability remains high. The downscaling of global circulation models and local and regional assessments of precipitation patterns produce large variations in the assessment of runoff and aquifer recharge. When combined with the different scenarios presented in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) Special Report on Emission Scenarios, the range of results shows major uncertainties in the prediction of future runoff patterns. A risk-based approach that uses a wide range of scenarios is needed and must be systematically used in hydrological assessments.
Bottom-up approaches give the opportunity to address vulnerable populations’ needs for resilience and development. By acknowledging that resilience is closely linked to a population’s state of development, level of economic diversification and the strength of their livelihoods assets, community-based climate change response programmes offer the opportunity to progressively build a capacity to reduce climate changerelated risks. Most of the options that will be considered on the basis of bottom-up approaches will not differ from classical agricultural development options for reducing poverty and increasing the standard of living of rural populations. The challenge in this case is to avoid maladaptation (i.e. designing development actions that are excessively sensitive to climate change and will therefore increase the vulnerability of beneficiaries). The concept of ‘climate-proof’ investments is central to the design of programmes for reducing climate change-related risks. It will become necessary to maintain a clear perspective on resilience when screening water development programmes. When designing development policies it will be necessary to systematically consider how the policies may be affected by climate change (OECD, 2009).
Options for adaptation to climate change will necessarily combine investments, improved or adaptive management, and modifications in or development of policies, institutions and capacity development. Such options will need to be applied at different scales: on fields and farms; in irrigation schemes (particularly in large schemes); in watersheds or aquifers; in river basins (including transboundary river basins); and at the national level. Table 3.2 lists typical response options and indicates their relevance for different scales.
Most of these options are not new to development programmes. Options for on-farm water conservation have been promoted for a long time as a response to water scarcity and climate variability. Options to address increasing water scarcity through better co-management of water at the watershed, aquifer and river basin level are needed in many water-stressed areas. Although there are overlaps between climate change adaptation and development, activities with an explicit focus on adaptation and climate change will also be required.
Adaptation activities that span the continuum from development to climate change can be organized in four categories. The first category includes activities that are fundamentally about fostering human development. These activities focus on reducing poverty and addressing factors that make people vulnerable to harm, regardless of the cause. The second category of activities focuses on building response capacity. Mostly of a capacity-building nature, these activities tend to involve institution-building and technological approaches adapted from development efforts. The third category involves activities to manage climate risk. Activities in this category focus specifically on hazards and impacts and follow the concept of climate risk management. The fourth category involves activities for confronting climate change. They focus almost exclusively on addressing climate change impacts. Activities in this category tend to target climate change-related risks that are beyond historic climate variability.
Increasing the reliability and flexibility of access to water for farmers is of prime importance. Many wasteful behaviours on farms are linked to the uncertainty associated with water distribution practices that do not allow farmers to optimize water application or raise the productivity of their crops. Water storage, and the combined use of groundwater and canal irrigation water, can go a long way towards improving the productivity of water used for irrigation. Economic incentives, in particular the use of subsidies for pumping, must be designed in a way that promotes the efficient use of water and avoids wastage of both energy and water resources.
From a livelihood perspective, building resilience involves reducing farmers’ exposure or sensitivity to shocks, or increasing their capacity to respond. Of prime importance is the ability to increase the farming systems’ buffering capacity in the face of more variable supplies of rainwater. This necessitates an increased capacity to store water in the soil, in surface reservoirs or in underground reservoirs. Any action that increases the capacity to access water when needed will increase resilience to climate variability. These actions include: on-farm water harvesting; the enhancement the soil’s capacity to hold moisture; on-farm water retention and enhanced infiltration; and, where possible, more systematic access to groundwater. Supplementary irrigation at critical periods of the cropping season can reduce losses and boost productivity.
Integrated water resources management in river basins will become more and more important as the combination of increased water use and the occurrence of extreme events will increase the interdependency of people and communities living in river basins, and as actions in one part of a basin will have repercussions for people further downstream. In places where climate change contributes to increased water scarcity, the whole package of supply enhancement and demand management options will need to be considered (FAO, 2012). Improved governance of land and water use will be required to accommodate the multiple uses of water, including for livestock and fish.
A type of insurance which has recently been applied in developing countries is known as index-based insurance. In index-based products, compensation is paid to the insured if the agreed threshold of an index is exceeded. The indices must be defined in such a way that they bear a direct relationship with the performance of the product insured. Index-based insurance is difficult to apply to small-scale hazards but seems to have good potential for hazards with regional impacts like hurricanes or droughts.
The adoption of a livelihood approach to water-related adaptation is a useful way to ensure that proposed actions will be beneficial to the people they are supposed to serve. Sullivan et al. (2008) consider four key dimensions of the water-related conditions of rural livelihoods: access to basic water services; crop and livestock water security; clean and healthy water environment; and secure and equitable water entitlement. Using such entry points to screen the impact of adaptation options ensures that they will be assessed in ways that are in line with the concerns and priorities of rural populations.
Irrigated agriculture accounts for only 20 percent of the area of global agriculture, but is more intensively managed. On average, irrigated agriculture uses greater amounts of inorganic fertilizer and other agrochemicals than most rainfed systems. Consequently, efforts to reduce greenhouse gases through improved crop management practices are likely to have more impact in irrigated lands than in rainfed areas.
